# BMIN503/EPID600 Final Project

Project Overview: The goal of my project is to explore the potential relationship between alcohol consumption and economic causes, such as median income and unemployment.

Introduction: Alcohol consumption is the 7th leading risk factor for both death and disability all over the world. It led to 2.8 million deaths in 2016. Although several previous research suggests that moderate level of alcohol consumption brings benefit to humans, this finding has resently been questioned. 
As a matter of fact, a new study published in 2018 (Griswold et al. 2018) states that the level of alcohol consumption which minimize harm on human health is zero. Additionally, negative effect of alcohol on health outcomes raise with the increase in the level of consumption. Therefore, while it is impossible to fully stop populational alcohol use, analyzing potential causes which affect alcohol consumption helps develop preventive strategies.

Methods:  I use the dataset from GHDx named [United States Alcohol Use Prevalence by County 2002-2012](http://ghdx.healthdata.org/record/ihme-data/united-states-alcohol-use-prevalence-county-2002-2012) to get information of the alcohol pattern across the U.S. (by year and sex). Additionally, I use a map shapefile from the US Census Bureau to create map plots, and data from the American Community Survey (ACS) to get the information of median income/unemployment/poverty rate.

Results: I first compared the national value between 2002 and 2012, and I found that the heavy&binge levels of alcohol consumption increase. Additionally, it seems sexes affect the change in alcohol consumption. Therefore, I use box plots to confirm the difference between males and females. To figure out how the increase pattern, I made plots for the changes in heavy/binge level of alcohol consumption over the ten years. To figure out whether geographic location (states) has an impact on alcohol consumption, I build static maps for changes in prevalence in both heavy/binge drinking and both/females/males. I am also going to explore potential relationship between alcohol consumption levels and economic factors.

Files: Please download alcohol_2002_2012.XLSX and acs_2012_2016_county_us_B27001 to get dataframe and plots in the final_project_SLIN.Rmd.