README.md, before:

# BMIN503_Final_Project
Template repo for Data Science for Biomedical Informatics (BMIN503/EPID600) final project

Author: Chris Wirtalla


This is the README file for my final project The Association between Surgical Utilization and Presidential Elections at the County Level in 2012 & 2016. The primary objective is to use multivariable linear regression to determine the relationship (if any) between the rate of surgical discharges in the year prior to a Presidential election and Presidential election results (Republican voting share), while adjusting for prior election results, county-level socioeconomic, and economic measures of growth. My hypothesis is that, on average, counties with higher surgical utilization will show an association with higher Republican voting shares in the following year's election due to surgeons leaning more Republican and conservatism being linked with more aggressive decision-making. Surgery is considered the most aggressive treatment a patient can receive.

All instructions for downloading and storing the datasets used in this project are included in the RMD/HTML files. I also have a Zotero bibliography that I'm uploading here as biblio.json file that I hope can be used to generate the References section of the project, if stored locally.

Any critiques or suggestions welcome! :-)


(Modified 11/17/2020)


This is the Readme file for my final project The Association between Surgical Utilization and Presidential Elections at the County Level in 2012 & 2016.  

All instructions for downloading and storing the datasets are included in the RMD/HTML files. I also have a Zotero bibilography but I'm not sure yet how to integrate it into Git yet.  

Any critiques or suggestions welcome. :-)

Commit message:

1) Uploading for final submission 2) Made county lines in maps thinner per peer feedback 3) Minor formatting adjustments

README.md, after:

# BMIN503_Final_Project
Template repo for Data Science for Biomedical Informatics (BMIN503/EPID600) final project

Author: Chris Wirtalla  
Course: BMIN 503 (Data Science)  
University of Pennsylvania  
Fall 2020  

This is the README file for my final project titled 'The Association Between Surgical Utilization Rates and Presidential Election Results in 2012 & 2016'. The primary objective is to use multivariable linear regression to determine the relationship (if any) between the rate of surgical discharges in the year prior to a Presidential election and Presidential election results (Republican voting share), while adjusting for prior election results, county-level socioeconomic, economic measures of growth, and surgeon workforce. My primary hypothesis is that, on average, counties with higher surgical utilization will show an association with higher Republican voting shares in the following year's election due to prior literatures that suggests surgeons lean more Republican and conservatism being linked with more aggressive decision-making. Surgery is considered the most aggressive treatment most patients can receive, so the objective of my project is to study whether the considerable variation in surgical decision-making seen across the United States may be associated with local political affiliations.

All instructions for downloading and storing the datasets used in this project are included in the RMD/HTML files. Data should be stored in the local directory of the user's choice (see the setwd() command included in the R code). A Zotero bibliography has been uploaded as a biblio.json file that I hope can be used to generate the References section of the project, if stored locally.
